PSMDB-1438-OIDC-8.0 (#997)
percona/psmdb-docs: docs/oidc-okta.md

# Configure OIDC authentication and authorization with Okta

This document focuses on configuring OIDC authentication for Percona Server for MongoDB deployment using [Okta :octicons-link-external-16:](https://www.okta.com/) as the identity provider.

The setup process consists of three main stages:

1. IdP setup:

    * Create and configure an OIDC application with Okta
    * Configure authorization server
    * Create users and groups

2. Configure Percona Server for MongoDB to use OIDC as authentication method
3. Connect to Percona Server for MongoDB using OIDC authentication

## Prerequisites

> 1. Percona Server for MongoDB Pro 8.0.12-4 and higher

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. ProBuild of Percona Server for MongoDB 8.0.12-4 or higher
```

2. Access to Okta Admin console

## Identity provider setup

### Create and configure an OIDC application with Okta

1. Log in to your Okta Admin console.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Applications** from the side menu.
3. Click **Create App Integration**.
4. In the dialog that appears select:

    * Sign-in method: Select **OIDC - OpenID Connect**.    

>     * Application type: **Select Native Application**. A command-line tool like the `mongo` shell is considered a "native" application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Application type: **Select Native Application**. A command-line tool like the MongoDB Shell is considered a "native" application.
```

    * In the **Enable immediate access** section, ensure the **Enable immediate access with Federation Broker Mode** option is enabled.
    * Click **Save**.

6. After saving, you will be redirected to the application details page. On the **General** tab, copy the **Client ID** to clipboard and ensure the **Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE)** option is enabled.

### Configure an authorization server

1. Go to **Security** > **API** from the side menu, then click on the **Authorization Servers** tab.
2. Click **Add Authorization Server**.
3. In the dialog that appears, fill in the following fields:

	* **Name**: Provide a descriptive name for your authorization server.
	* **Audience**: Paste the Client ID value here.
	* **Description**: Optionally, add a description for your authorization server.
	* Click **Save**. You will be automatically redirected to the server's page.

4. Find the issuer URL. Go to the **Settings** tab and copy the **Issuer Metadata URI** value up to the `/.well-known/oauth-authorization-server`. The URL must be in the following format:

    ```

>     https://<your-okta-domain>/oauth2/ausu08lpq4VQRntUz697

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    https://<your-okta-domain>/oauth2/<issuer-id>
```

1. Follow the steps described in the [Groups :octicons-link-external-16:](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?type=oie&locale=en&id=Directory_Groups) documentation to create required groups

2. Create users. Specify the user email as the username. Follow the steps in the [Add users manually :octicons-link-external-16:](https://help.okta.com/oie/en-us/content/topics/users-groups-profiles/usgp-add-users.htm) documentation to create users.

3. Assign the groups you created to users.

## Configure Percona Server for MongoDB

Now you need to configure authentication in Percona Server for MongoDB. Specify the external identity provider configuration for the `oidcIdentityProviders` server parameter either via the configuration file or the command line. 

=== "Configuration file"

    1. Edit the `/etc/mongod.conf` configuration file:

        ```yaml
        security:
           authorization: enabled
        setParameter:
           authenticationMechanisms: MONGODB-OIDC
           oidcIdentityProviders: '[ {
              "issuer": "https://my-okta.okta.com/oauth2/austxj66qrgAVPlAj697",

>               "audience": "example@mongodb.com",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
              "audience": "example@my-company.com",
```

              "authNamePrefix": "okta",
              "useAuthorizationClaim": true,
              "authorizationClaim": "oidc-test",
              "clientId": "0oatxj71cmQfzQ9Us697"
           } ]'
        ```
    
    2. Start or restart Percona Server for MongoDB:

        ```{.bash data-prompt="$"}
        $ sudo systemctl start mongod
        ```

=== "Command line"

    ```{.bash data-prompt="$"}
    $ mongod --auth --setParameter authenticationMechanisms=MONGODB-OIDC --setParameter \
    'oidcIdentityProviders=[ {
       "issuer": "https://my-okta.okta.com/oauth2/austxj66qrgAVPlAj697",

>        "audience": "example@mongodb.com",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       "audience": "example@my-company.com",
```

       "authNamePrefix": "okta",
       "useAuthorizationClaim": true,
       "authorizationClaim": "oidc-test",
       "clientId": "0oatxj71cmQfzQ9Us697"
    } ]'
    ```

The `useAuthorizationClaim` configuration option defines how your users are authorized.

* When set to `true`, users are authorized using identity provider groups. Users are created and stored on the IdP side.

> * When set to `false`, users are authorized by their usernames in the `$external` database in MongoDB. When using `useAuthorizationClaim: false`, **do not** specify `authorizationClaim`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When set to `false`, users are authorized by their usernames in the `$external` database in Percona Server for MongoDB. When using `useAuthorizationClaim: false`, **do not** specify `authorizationClaim`.
```

```javascript
db.getSiblingDB("admin").createRole({
  role: "okta/Everyone",
  privileges: [ ],
  roles: [ "readWriteAnyDatabase" ]
})
```

Create roles for all groups you have defined in Okta.

## Create users 

**Complete this step if you set `useAuthorizationClaim` to `false`**

Create users in the `$external` database. The username must consist of the `authNamePrefix` and the email that you specified when you created users in Okta. The username format is:

```
authNamePrefix/email
```

If you set the `authNamePrefix` to `okta`, then the command to create a user is the following:

```javascript
db.getSiblingDB("$external").createUser({
  user: "okta/john.doe@example.com",
  roles: [
    { role: "okta/Everyone", db: "admin" } 
  ]
})
```

## Authenticate in Percona Server for MongoDB

### Authorization code flow

1. Connect to Percona Server for MongoDB:

    ```{.bash data-prompt="$"}
    $ mongosh  --authenticationMechanism MONGODB-OIDC --oidcFlows auth-code 
    ```

2. In the Okta login portal in your browser, specify the credentials of one of the users you defined in Okta and click Sign in.

> 3. Upon successful log in you must see the **Login successful** screen. In your `mongo` client, you should see the output as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Upon successful log in you must see the **Login successful** screen. In your MongoDB client, you should see the output as follows:
```

    ```{.text .no-copy}
    Using MongoDB:		{{release}}
    Using Mongosh:		{{mongosh}}

    For mongosh info see: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/

    test>
    ```

### Device authentication flow

1. Connect to Percona Server for MongoDB:

    ```{.bash data-prompt="$"}
    $ mongosh  --authenticationMechanism MONGODB-OIDC --oidcFlows device-auth 
    ```

    ??? example "Sample output"

        ```
        Visit the following URL to complete authentication: https://my-okta.okta.com/activate
        Enter the following code on that page: LRVCRLXP
        ```

2. Open the URL on another device that has the web browser.
3. Enter the code in the **Activation Code** field and click **Next**
4. You should see the **Device Activated** message on the screen. In your `mongo` client, you should see the output as follows:

    ```{.text .no-copy}
    Using MongoDB:		{{release}}
    Using Mongosh:		{{mongosh}}

>     For mongosh info see: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For MongoDB Shell more information see: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/
```

Author: It's part of the output and should be fixed in code first
